Science programmes 
of study: key stages 
1 and 2 
National curriculum in England 
September 2013 
Contents 
Key stage 1 
Key stage 1 programme of study – years 1 and 2 
Year 1 programme of study 
Year 2 programme of study 
Lower key stage 2 – years 3 and 4 
Lower key stage 2 programme of study 
Year 3 programme of study 
Year 4 programme of study 
Upper key stage 2 – years 5 and 6 
Upper key stage 2 programme of study 
Year 5 programme of study 
Year 6 programme of study 
5 
6 
7 
10 
13 
14 
16 
20 
24 
25 
27 
31 
2 
Purpose of study 
Science – key stages 1 and 2 
A high-quality science education provides the foundations for understanding the world 
through the specific disciplines of biology, chemistry and physics. Science has changed 
our lives and is vital to the world’s future prosperity, and all pupils should be taught 
essential aspects of the knowledge, methods, processes and uses of science. Through 
building up a body of key foundational knowledge and concepts, pupils should be 
encouraged to recognise the power of rational explanation and develop a sense of 
excitement and curiosity about natural phenomena. They should be encouraged to 
understand how science can be used to explain what is occurring, predict how things will 
behave, and analyse causes. 
Aims 
The national curriculum for science aims to ensure that all pupils: 
 develop scientific knowledge and conceptual understanding through the specific 
disciplines of biology, chemistry and physics 
 develop understanding of the nature, processes and methods of science through 
different types of science enquiries that help them to answer scientific questions about 
the world around them 
 are equipped with the scientific knowledge required to understand the uses and 
implications of science, today and for the future. 
Scientific knowledge and conceptual understanding 
The programmes of study describe a sequence of knowledge and concepts. While it is 
important that pupils make progress, it is also vitally important that they develop secure 
understanding of each key block of knowledge and concepts in order to progress to the 
next stage. Insecure, superficial understanding will not allow genuine progression: pupils 
may struggle at key points of transition (such as between primary and secondary school), 
build up serious misconceptions, and/or have significant difficulties in understanding 
higher-order content. 
Pupils should be able to describe associated processes and key characteristics in 
common language, but they should also be familiar with, and use, technical terminology 
accurately and precisely. They should build up an extended specialist vocabulary. They 
should also apply their mathematical knowledge to their understanding of science, 
including collecting, presenting and analysing data. The social and economic implications 
of science are important but, generally, they are taught most appropriately within the wider 
school curriculum: teachers will wish to use different contexts to maximise their pupils’ 
engagement with and motivation to study science. 
3 
Science – key stages 1 and 2 
The nature, processes and methods of science 
‘Working scientifically’ specifies the understanding of the nature, processes and methods 
of science for each year group. It should not be taught as a separate strand. The notes 
and guidance give examples of how ‘working scientifically’ might be embedded within the 
content of biology, chemistry and physics, focusing on the key features of scientific 
enquiry, so that pupils learn to use a variety of approaches to answer relevant scientific 
questions. These types of scientific enquiry should include: observing over time; pattern 
seeking; identifying, classifying and grouping; comparative and fair testing (controlled 
investigations); and researching using secondary sources. Pupils should seek answers to 
questions through collecting, analysing and presenting data. ‘Working scientifically’ will be 
developed further at key stages 3 and 4, once pupils have built up sufficient understanding 
of science to engage meaningfully in more sophisticated discussion of experimental design 
and control. 
Spoken language 
The national curriculum for science reflects the importance of spoken language in pupils’ 
development across the whole curriculum – cognitively, socially and linguistically. The 
quality and variety of language that pupils hear and speak are key factors in developing 
their scientific vocabulary and articulating scientific concepts clearly and precisely. They 
must be assisted in making their thinking clear, both to themselves and others, and 
teachers should ensure that pupils build secure foundations by using discussion to probe 
and remedy their misconceptions. 
School curriculum 
The programmes of study for science are set out year-by-year for key stages 1 and 2. 
Schools are, however, only required to teach the relevant programme of study by the end 
of the key stage. Within each key stage, schools therefore have the flexibility to introduce 
content earlier or later than set out in the programme of study. In addition, schools can 
introduce key stage content during an earlier key stage if appropriate. All schools are also 
required to set out their school curriculum for science on a year-by-year basis and make 
this information available online. 
Attainment targets 
By the end of each key stage, pupils are expected to know, apply and understand the 
matters, skills and processes specified in the relevant programme of study. 
Schools are not required by law to teach the content indicated as being ‘non-statutory’. 
4 
Science – key stages 1 and 2 
Key stage 1 
The principal focus of science teaching in key stage 1 is to enable pupils to experience 
and observe phenomena, looking more closely at the natural and humanly-constructed 
world around them. They should be encouraged to be curious and ask questions about 
what they notice. They should be helped to develop their understanding of scientific ideas 
by using different types of scientific enquiry to answer their own questions, including 
observing changes over a period of time, noticing patterns, grouping and classifying 
things, carrying out simple comparative tests, and finding things out using secondary 
sources of information. They should begin to use simple scientific language to talk about 
what they have found out and communicate their ideas to a range of audiences in a variety 
of ways. Most of the learning about science should be done through the use of first-hand 
practical experiences, but there should also be some use of appropriate secondary 
sources, such as books, photographs and videos. 
‘Working scientifically’ is described separately in the programme of study, but must always 
be taught through and clearly related to the teaching of substantive science content in the 
programme of study. Throughout the notes and guidance, examples show how scientific 
methods and skills might be linked to specific elements of the content. 
Pupils should read and spell scientific vocabulary at a level consistent with their increasing 
word reading and spelling knowledge at key stage 1. 
5 
Science – key stages 1 and 2 
6 
Key stage 1 programme of study – years 1 and 2 
 
Working scientifically 
 
Statutory requirements 
During years 1 and 2, pupils should be taught to use the following practical scientific 
methods, processes and skills through the teaching of the programme of study content: 
 asking simple questions and recognising that they can be answered in different ways 
 observing closely, using simple equipment 
 performing simple tests 
 identifying and classifying 
 using their observations and ideas to suggest answers to questions 
 gathering and recording data to help in answering questions. 
 
Notes and guidance (non-statutory) 
Pupils in years 1 and 2 should explore the world around them and raise their own 
questions. They should experience different types of scientific enquiries, including 
practical activities, and begin to recognise ways in which they might answer scientific 
questions. They should use simple features to compare objects, materials and living 
things and, with help, decide how to sort and group them, observe changes over time, 
and, with guidance, they should begin to notice patterns and relationships. They should 
ask people questions and use simple secondary sources to find answers. They should 
use simple measurements and equipment (for example, hand lenses, egg timers) to 
gather data, carry out simple tests, record simple data, and talk about what they have 
found out and how they found it out. With help, they should record and communicate 
their findings in a range of ways and begin to use simple scientific language. 
These opportunities for working scientifically should be provided across years 1 and 2 so 
that the expectations in the programme of study can be met by the end of year 2. Pupils 
are not expected to cover each aspect for every area of study. 
 
Science – key stages 1 and 2 
7 
Year 1 programme of study 
 
Plants 
 
Statutory requirements 
Pupils should be taught to: 
 identify and name a variety of common wild and garden plants, including deciduous 
and evergreen trees 
 identify and describe the basic structure of a variety of common flowering plants, 
including trees. 
 
Notes and guidance (non-statutory) 
Pupils should use the local environment throughout the year to explore and answer 
questions about plants growing in their habitat. Where possible, they should observe the 
growth of flowers and vegetables that they have planted. 
They should become familiar with common names of flowers, examples of deciduous 
and evergreen trees, and plant structures (including leaves, flowers (blossom), petals, 
fruit, roots, bulb, seed, trunk, branches, stem). 
Pupils might work scientifically by: observing closely, perhaps using magnifying glasses, 
and comparing and contrasting familiar plants; describing how they were able to identify 
and group them, and drawing diagrams showing the parts of different plants including 
trees. Pupils might keep records of how plants have changed over time, for example the 
leaves falling off trees and buds opening; and compare and contrast what they have 
found out about different plants. 
 
Animals, including humans 
 
Statutory requirements 
Pupils should be taught to: 
 identify and name a variety of common animals including fish, amphibians, reptiles, 
birds and mammals 
 identify and name a variety of common animals that are carnivores, herbivores and 
omnivores 
Science – key stages 1 and 2 
8 
Statutory requirements 
 describe and compare the structure of a variety of common animals (fish, 
amphibians, reptiles, birds and mammals, including pets) 
 identify, name, draw and label the basic parts of the human body and say which part 
of the body is associated with each sense. 
 
Notes and guidance (non-statutory) 
Pupils should use the local environment throughout the year to explore and answer 
questions about animals in their habitat. They should understand how to take care of 
animals taken from their local environment and the need to return them safely after 
study. Pupils should become familiar with the common names of some fish, amphibians, 
reptiles, birds and mammals, including those that are kept as pets. 
Pupils should have plenty of opportunities to learn the names of the main body parts 
(including head, neck, arms, elbows, legs, knees, face, ears, eyes, hair, mouth, teeth) 
through games, actions, songs and rhymes. 
Pupils might work scientifically by: using their observations to compare and contrast 
animals at first hand or through videos and photographs, describing how they identify 
and group them; grouping animals according to what they eat; and using their senses to 
compare different textures, sounds and smells. 
 
Everyday materials 
 
Statutory requirements 
Pupils should be taught to: 
 distinguish between an object and the material from which it is made 
 identify and name a variety of everyday materials, including wood, plastic, glass, 
metal, water, and rock 
 describe the simple physical properties of a variety of everyday materials 
 compare and group together a variety of everyday materials on the basis of their 
simple physical properties. 
 
Science – key stages 1 and 2 
9 
Notes and guidance (non-statutory) 
Pupils should explore, name, discuss and raise and answer questions about everyday 
materials so that they become familiar with the names of materials and properties such 
as: hard/soft; stretchy/stiff; shiny/dull; rough/smooth; bendy/not bendy; waterproof/not 
waterproof; absorbent/not absorbent; opaque/transparent. Pupils should explore and 
experiment with a wide variety of materials, not only those listed in the programme of 
study, but including for example: brick, paper, fabrics, elastic, foil. 
Pupils might work scientifically by: performing simple tests to explore questions, 
for example: ‘What is the best material for an umbrella? ...for lining a dog basket? 
...for curtains? ...for a bookshelf? ...for a gymnast’s leotard?’ 
 
Seasonal changes 
 
Statutory requirements 
Pupils should be taught to: 
 observe changes across the four seasons 
 observe and describe weather associated with the seasons and how day length 
varies. 
 
Notes and guidance (non-statutory) 
Pupils should observe and talk about changes in the weather and the seasons. 
Note: Pupils should be warned that it is not safe to look directly at the Sun, even when 
wearing dark glasses. 
Pupils might work scientifically by: making tables and charts about the weather; and 
making displays of what happens in the world around them, including day length, as the 
seasons change. 
 
Science – key stages 1 and 2 
10 
Year 2 programme of study 
 
Living things and their habitats 
 
Statutory requirements 
Pupils should be taught to: 
 explore and compare the differences between things that are living, dead, and things 
that have never been alive 
 identify that most living things live in habitats to which they are suited and describe 
how different habitats provide for the basic needs of different kinds of animals and 
plants, and how they depend on each other 
 identify and name a variety of plants and animals in their habitats, including micro
habitats 
 describe how animals obtain their food from plants and other animals, using the idea 
of a simple food chain, and identify and name different sources of food. 
 
Notes and guidance (non-statutory) 
Pupils should be introduced to the idea that all living things have certain characteristics 
that are essential for keeping them alive and healthy. They should raise and answer 
questions that help them to become familiar with the life processes that are common to 
all living things. Pupils should be introduced to the terms ‘habitat’ (a natural environment 
or home of a variety of plants and animals) and ‘micro-habitat’ (a very small habitat, for 
example for woodlice under stones, logs or leaf litter). They should raise and answer 
questions about the local environment that help them to identify and study a variety of 
plants and animals within their habitat and observe how living things depend on each 
other, for example, plants serving as a source of food and shelter for animals. Pupils 
should compare animals in familiar habitats with animals found in less familiar habitats, 
for example, on the seashore, in woodland, in the ocean, in the rainforest. 
Pupils might work scientifically by: sorting and classifying things according to whether 
they are living, dead or were never alive, and recording their findings using charts. They 
should describe how they decided where to place things, exploring questions for 
example: ‘Is a flame alive? Is a deciduous tree dead in winter?’ and talk about ways of 
answering their questions. They could construct a simple food chain that includes 
humans (e.g. grass, cow, human). They could describe the conditions in different 
habitats and micro-habitats (under log, on stony path, under bushes) and find out how 
the conditions affect the number and type(s) of plants and animals that live there. 
 
Science – key stages 1 and 2 
11 
Plants 
 
Statutory requirements 
Pupils should be taught to: 
 observe and describe how seeds and bulbs grow into mature plants 
 find out and describe how plants need water, light and a suitable temperature to grow 
and stay healthy. 
 
Notes and guidance (non-statutory) 
Pupils should use the local environment throughout the year to observe how different 
plants grow. Pupils should be introduced to the requirements of plants for germination, 
growth and survival, as well as to the processes of reproduction and growth in plants. 
Note: Seeds and bulbs need water to grow but most do not need light; seeds and bulbs 
have a store of food inside them. 
Pupils might work scientifically by: observing and recording, with some accuracy, the 
growth of a variety of plants as they change over time from a seed or bulb, or observing 
similar plants at different stages of growth; setting up a comparative test to show that 
plants need light and water to stay healthy. 
 
Animals, including humans 
 
Statutory requirements 
Pupils should be taught to: 
 notice that animals, including humans, have offspring which grow into adults 
 find out about and describe the basic needs of animals, including humans, for 
survival (water, food and air) 
 describe the importance for humans of exercise, eating the right amounts of different 
types of food, and hygiene. 
 
Notes and guidance (non-statutory) 
Pupils should be introduced to the basic needs of animals for survival, as well as the 
importance of exercise and nutrition for humans. They should also be introduced to the 
processes of reproduction and growth in animals. The focus at this stage should be on 
questions that help pupils to recognise growth; they should not be expected to 
understand how reproduction occurs. 
Science – key stages 1 and 2 
12 
Notes and guidance (non-statutory) 
The following examples might be used: egg, chick, chicken; egg, caterpillar, pupa, 
butterfly; spawn, tadpole, frog; lamb, sheep. Growing into adults can include reference to 
baby, toddler, child, teenager, adult. 
Pupils might work scientifically by: observing, through video or first-hand observation 
and measurement, how different animals, including humans, grow; asking questions 
about what things animals need for survival and what humans need to stay healthy; and 
suggesting ways to find answers to their questions. 
 
Uses of everyday materials 
 
Statutory requirements 
Pupils should be taught to: 
 identify and compare the suitability of a variety of everyday materials, including 
wood, metal, plastic, glass, brick, rock, paper and cardboard for particular uses 
 find out how the shapes of solid objects made from some materials can be changed 
by squashing, bending, twisting and stretching. 
 
Notes and guidance (non-statutory) 
Pupils should identify and discuss the uses of different everyday materials so that they 
become familiar with how some materials are used for more than one thing (metal can 
be used for coins, cans, cars and table legs; wood can be used for matches, floors, and 
telegraph poles) or different materials are used for the same thing (spoons can be made 
from plastic, wood, metal, but not normally from glass). They should think about the 
properties of materials that make them suitable or unsuitable for particular purposes and 
they should be encouraged to think about unusual and creative uses for everyday 
materials. Pupils might find out about people who have developed useful new materials, 
for example John Dunlop, Charles Macintosh or John McAdam. 
Pupils might work scientifically by: comparing the uses of everyday materials in and 
around the school with materials found in other places (at home, the journey to school, 
on visits, and in stories, rhymes and songs); observing closely, identifying and 
classifying the uses of different materials, and recording their observations.  
 
Science – key stages 1 and 2 
Lower key stage 2 – years 3 and 4 
The principal focus of science teaching in lower key stage 2 is to enable pupils to broaden 
their scientific view of the world around them. They should do this through exploring, 
talking about, testing and developing ideas about everyday phenomena and the 
relationships between living things and familiar environments, and by beginning to develop 
their ideas about functions, relationships and interactions. They should ask their own 
questions about what they observe and make some decisions about which types of 
scientific enquiry are likely to be the best ways of answering them, including observing 
changes over time, noticing patterns, grouping and classifying things, carrying out simple 
comparative and fair tests and finding things out using secondary sources of information. 
They should draw simple conclusions and use some scientific language, first, to talk about 
and, later, to write about what they have found out. 
‘Working scientifically’ is described separately at the beginning of the programme of study, 
but must always be taught through and clearly related to substantive science content in 
the programme of study. Throughout the notes and guidance, examples show how 
scientific methods and skills might be linked to specific elements of the content. 
Pupils should read and spell scientific vocabulary correctly and with confidence, using their 
growing word reading and spelling knowledge. 
13 
Science – key stages 1 and 2 
14 
Lower key stage 2 programme of study 
 
Working scientifically 
 
Statutory requirements 
During years 3 and 4, pupils should be taught to use the following practical scientific 
methods, processes and skills through the teaching of the programme of study content: 
 asking relevant questions and using different types of scientific enquiries to answer 
them 
 setting up simple practical enquiries, comparative and fair tests 
 making systematic and careful observations and, where appropriate, taking accurate 
measurements using standard units, using a range of equipment, including 
thermometers and data loggers 
 gathering, recording, classifying and presenting data in a variety of ways to help in 
answering questions 
 recording findings using simple scientific language, drawings, labelled diagrams, 
keys, bar charts, and tables 
 reporting on findings from enquiries, including oral and written explanations, displays 
or presentations of results and conclusions 
 using results to draw simple conclusions, make predictions for new values, suggest 
improvements and raise further questions 
 identifying differences, similarities or changes related to simple scientific ideas and 
processes 
 using straightforward scientific evidence to answer questions or to support their 
findings. 
 
Notes and guidance (non-statutory) 
Pupils in years 3 and 4 should be given a range of scientific experiences to enable them 
to raise their own questions about the world around them. They should start to make 
their own decisions about the most appropriate type of scientific enquiry they might use 
to answer questions; recognise when a simple fair test is necessary and help to decide 
how to set it up; talk about criteria for grouping, sorting and classifying; and use simple 
keys. They should begin to look for naturally occurring patterns and relationships and 
decide what data to collect to identify them. They should help to make decisions about 
what observations to make, how long to make them for and the type of simple 
equipment that might be used. 
Notes and guidance (non-statutory) 
Science – key stages 1 and 2 
They should learn how to use new equipment, such as data loggers, appropriately. They 
should collect data from their own observations and measurements, using notes, simple 
tables and standard units, and help to make decisions about how to record and analyse 
this data. With help, pupils should look for changes, patterns, similarities and differences 
in their data in order to draw simple conclusions and answer questions. With support, 
they should identify new questions arising from the data, making predictions for new 
values within or beyond the data they have collected and finding ways of improving what 
they have already done. They should also recognise when and how secondary sources 
might help them to answer questions that cannot be answered through practical 
investigations. Pupils should use relevant scientific language to discuss their ideas and 
communicate their findings in ways that are appropriate for different audiences. 
These opportunities for working scientifically should be provided across years 3 and 4 so 
that the expectations in the programme of study can be met by the end of year 4. Pupils 
are not expected to cover each aspect for every area of study. 
15 
Science – key stages 1 and 2 
16 
Year 3 programme of study 
 
Plants 
 
Statutory requirements 
Pupils should be taught to: 
 identify and describe the functions of different parts of flowering plants: roots, 
stem/trunk, leaves and flowers 
 explore the requirements of plants for life and growth (air, light, water, nutrients from 
soil, and room to grow) and how they vary from plant to plant 
 investigate the way in which water is transported within plants 
 explore the part that flowers play in the life cycle of flowering plants, including 
pollination, seed formation and seed dispersal. 
 
Notes and guidance (non-statutory) 
Pupils should be introduced to the relationship between structure and function: the idea 
that every part has a job to do. They should explore questions that focus on the role of 
the roots and stem in nutrition and support, leaves for nutrition and flowers for 
reproduction. 
Note: Pupils can be introduced to the idea that plants can make their own food, but at 
this stage they do not need to understand how this happens. 
Pupils might work scientifically by: comparing the effect of different factors on plant 
growth, for example, the amount of light, the amount of fertiliser; discovering how seeds 
are formed by observing the different stages of plant life cycles over a period of time; 
looking for patterns in the structure of fruits that relate to how the seeds are dispersed. 
They might observe how water is transported in plants, for example, by putting cut, white 
carnations into coloured water and observing how water travels up the stem to the 
flowers. 
 
Science – key stages 1 and 2 
17 
Animals, including humans 
 
Statutory requirements 
Pupils should be taught to: 
 identify that animals, including humans, need the right types and amount of nutrition, 
and that they cannot make their own food; they get nutrition from what they eat 
 identify that humans and some other animals have skeletons and muscles for 
support, protection and movement. 
 
Notes and guidance (non-statutory) 
Pupils should continue to learn about the importance of nutrition and should be 
introduced to the main body parts associated with the skeleton and muscles, finding out 
how different parts of the body have special functions. 
Pupils might work scientifically by: identifying and grouping animals with and without 
skeletons and observing and comparing their movement; exploring ideas about what 
would happen if humans did not have skeletons. They might compare and contrast the 
diets of different animals (including their pets) and decide ways of grouping them 
according to what they eat. They might research different food groups and how they 
keep us healthy and design meals based on what they find out. 
 
Rocks 
 
Statutory requirements 
Pupils should be taught to: 
 compare and group together different kinds of rocks on the basis of their appearance 
and simple physical properties 
 describe in simple terms how fossils are formed when things that have lived are 
trapped within rock 
 recognise that soils are made from rocks and organic matter. 
 
Notes and guidance (non-statutory) 
Linked with work in geography, pupils should explore different kinds of rocks and soils, 
including those in the local environment. 
Science – key stages 1 and 2 
18 
Notes and guidance (non-statutory) 
Pupils might work scientifically by: observing rocks, including those used in buildings 
and gravestones, and exploring how and why they might have changed over time; using 
a hand lens or microscope to help them to identify and classify rocks according to 
whether they have grains or crystals, and whether they have fossils in them. Pupils 
might research and discuss the different kinds of living things whose fossils are found in 
sedimentary rock and explore how fossils are formed. Pupils could explore different soils 
and identify similarities and differences between them and investigate what happens 
when rocks are rubbed together or what changes occur when they are in water. They 
can raise and answer questions about the way soils are formed. 
 
Light 
 
Statutory requirements 
Pupils should be taught to: 
 recognise that they need light in order to see things and that dark is the absence of 
light 
 notice that light is reflected from surfaces 
 recognise that light from the sun can be dangerous and that there are ways to protect 
their eyes 
 recognise that shadows are formed when the light from a light source is blocked by
an opaque object 
 find patterns in the way that the size of shadows change. 
 
Notes and guidance (non-statutory) 
Pupils should explore what happens when light reflects off a mirror or other reflective 
surfaces, including playing mirror games to help them to answer questions about how 
light behaves. They should think about why it is important to protect their eyes from 
bright lights. They should look for, and measure, shadows, and find out how they are 
formed and what might cause the shadows to change. 
Note: Pupils should be warned that it is not safe to look directly at the Sun, even when 
wearing dark glasses. 
Pupils might work scientifically by: looking for patterns in what happens to shadows 
when the light source moves or the distance between the light source and the object 
changes. 
 
Science – key stages 1 and 2 
19 
Forces and magnets 
 
Statutory requirements 
Pupils should be taught to: 
 compare how things move on different surfaces 
 notice that some forces need contact between two objects, but magnetic forces can 
act at a distance 
 observe how magnets attract or repel each other and attract some materials and not 
others 
 compare and group together a variety of everyday materials on the basis of whether 
they are attracted to a magnet, and identify some magnetic materials 
 describe magnets as having two poles 
 predict whether two magnets will attract or repel each other, depending on which 
poles are facing. 
 
Notes and guidance (non-statutory) 
Pupils should observe that magnetic forces can act without direct contact, unlike most 
forces, where direct contact is necessary (for example, opening a door, pushing a 
swing). They should explore the behaviour and everyday uses of different magnets (for 
example, bar, ring, button and horseshoe). 
Pupils might work scientifically by: comparing how different things move and grouping 
them; raising questions and carrying out tests to find out how far things move on 
different surfaces and gathering and recording data to find answers their questions; 
exploring the strengths of different magnets and finding a fair way to compare them; 
sorting materials into those that are magnetic and those that are not; looking for patterns 
in the way that magnets behave in relation to each other and what might affect this, for 
example, the strength of the magnet or which pole faces another; identifying how these 
properties make magnets useful in everyday items and suggesting creative uses for 
different magnets. 
 
Science – key stages 1 and 2 
20 
Year 4 programme of study 
 
Living things and their habitats 
 
Statutory requirements 
Pupils should be taught to: 
 recognise that living things can be grouped in a variety of ways 
 explore and use classification keys to help group, identify and name a variety of living 
things in their local and wider environment 
 recognise that environments can change and that this can sometimes pose dangers 
to living things. 
 
Notes and guidance (non-statutory) 
Pupils should use the local environment throughout the year to raise and answer 
questions that help them to identify and study plants and animals in their habitat. They 
should identify how the habitat changes throughout the year. Pupils should explore 
possible ways of grouping a wide selection of living things that include animals and 
flowering plants and non-flowering plants. Pupils could begin to put vertebrate animals 
into groups such as fish, amphibians, reptiles, birds, and mammals; and invertebrates 
into snails and slugs, worms, spiders, and insects. 
Note: Plants can be grouped into categories such as flowering plants (including 
grasses) and non-flowering plants, such as ferns and mosses. 
Pupils should explore examples of human impact (both positive and negative) on 
environments, for example, the positive effects of nature reserves, ecologically planned 
parks, or garden ponds, and the negative effects of population and development, litter or 
deforestation. 
Pupils might work scientifically by: using and making simple guides or keys to explore 
and identify local plants and animals; making a guide to local living things; raising and 
answering questions based on their observations of animals and what they have found 
out about other animals that they have researched. 
 
Science – key stages 1 and 2 
21 
Animals, including humans 
 
Statutory requirements 
Pupils should be taught to: 
 describe the simple functions of the basic parts of the digestive system in humans 
 identify the different types of teeth in humans and their simple functions 
 construct and interpret a variety of food chains, identifying producers, predators and 
prey. 
 
Notes and guidance (non-statutory) 
Pupils should be introduced to the main body parts associated with the digestive system, 
for example, mouth, tongue, teeth, oesophagus, stomach and small and large intestine 
and explore questions that help them to understand their special functions. 
Pupils might work scientifically by: comparing the teeth of carnivores and herbivores, 
and suggesting reasons for differences; finding out what damages teeth and how to look 
after them. They might draw and discuss their ideas about the digestive system and 
compare them with models or images. 
 
States of matter 
 
Statutory requirements 
Pupils should be taught to: 
 compare and group materials together, according to whether they are solids, liquids 
or gases 
 observe that some materials change state when they are heated or cooled, and 
measure or research the temperature at which this happens in degrees Celsius (°C) 
 identify the part played by evaporation and condensation in the water cycle and 
associate the rate of evaporation with temperature. 
 
Notes and guidance (non-statutory) 
Pupils should explore a variety of everyday materials and develop simple descriptions of 
the states of matter (solids hold their shape; liquids form a pool not a pile; gases escape 
from an unsealed container). Pupils should observe water as a solid, a liquid and a gas 
and should note the changes to water when it is heated or cooled. 
Science – key stages 1 and 2 
22 
Notes and guidance (non-statutory) 
Note: Teachers should avoid using materials where heating is associated with chemical 
change, for example, through baking or burning. 
Pupils might work scientifically by: grouping and classifying a variety of different 
materials; exploring the effect of temperature on substances such as chocolate, butter, 
cream (for example, to make food such as chocolate crispy cakes and ice-cream for a 
party). They could research the temperature at which materials change state, for 
example, when iron melts or when oxygen condenses into a liquid. They might observe 
and record evaporation over a period of time, for example, a puddle in the playground or 
washing on a line, and investigate the effect of temperature on washing drying or 
snowmen melting. 
 
Sound 
 
Statutory requirements 
Pupils should be taught to: 
 identify how sounds are made, associating some of them with something vibrating 
 recognise that vibrations from sounds travel through a medium to the ear 
 find patterns between the pitch of a sound and features of the object that produced it 
 find patterns between the volume of a sound and the strength of the vibrations that 
produced it 
 recognise that sounds get fainter as the distance from the sound source increases. 
 
Notes and guidance (non-statutory) 
Pupils should explore and identify the way sound is made through vibration in a range of 
different musical instruments from around the world; and find out how the pitch and 
volume of sounds can be changed in a variety of ways. 
Pupils might work scientifically by: finding patterns in the sounds that are made by 
different objects such as saucepan lids of different sizes or elastic bands of different 
thicknesses. They might make earmuffs from a variety of different materials to 
investigate which provides the best insulation against sound. They could make and play 
their own instruments by using what they have found out about pitch and volume. 
 
Science – key stages 1 and 2 
23 
Electricity 
 
Statutory requirements 
Pupils should be taught to: 
 identify common appliances that run on electricity 
 construct a simple series electrical circuit, identifying and naming its basic parts, 
including cells, wires, bulbs, switches and buzzers 
 identify whether or not a lamp will light in a simple series circuit, based on whether or 
not the lamp is part of a complete loop with a battery 
 recognise that a switch opens and closes a circuit and associate this with whether or 
not a lamp lights in a simple series circuit 
 recognise some common conductors and insulators, and associate metals with being 
good conductors. 
 
Notes and guidance (non-statutory) 
Pupils should construct simple series circuits, trying different components, for example, 
bulbs, buzzers and motors, and including switches, and use their circuits to create 
simple devices. Pupils should draw the circuit as a pictorial representation, not 
necessarily using conventional circuit symbols at this stage; these will be introduced in 
year 6. 
Note: Pupils might use the terms current and voltage, but these should not be 
introduced or defined formally at this stage. Pupils should be taught about precautions 
for working safely with electricity. 
Pupils might work scientifically by: observing patterns, for example, that bulbs get 
brighter if more cells are added, that metals tend to be conductors of electricity, and that 
some materials can and some cannot be used to connect across a gap in a circuit. 
 
Science – key stages 1 and 2 
Upper key stage 2 – years 5 and 6 
The principal focus of science teaching in upper key stage 2 is to enable pupils to develop 
a deeper understanding of a wide range of scientific ideas. They should do this through 
exploring and talking about their ideas; asking their own questions about scientific 
phenomena; and analysing functions, relationships and interactions more systematically. 
At upper key stage 2, they should encounter more abstract ideas and begin to recognise 
how these ideas help them to understand and predict how the world operates. They should 
also begin to recognise that scientific ideas change and develop over time. They should 
select the most appropriate ways to answer science questions using different types of 
scientific enquiry, including observing changes over different periods of time, noticing 
patterns, grouping and classifying things, carrying out comparative and fair tests and 
finding things out using a wide range of secondary sources of information. Pupils should 
draw conclusions based on their data and observations, use evidence to justify their ideas, 
and use their scientific knowledge and understanding to explain their findings. 
‘Working and thinking scientifically’ is described separately at the beginning of the 
programme of study, but must always be taught through and clearly related to substantive 
science content in the programme of study. Throughout the notes and guidance, examples 
show how scientific methods and skills might be linked to specific elements of the content. 
Pupils should read, spell and pronounce scientific vocabulary correctly. 
24 
Science – key stages 1 and 2 
25 
Upper key stage 2 programme of study 
 
Working scientifically 
 
Statutory requirements 
During years 5 and 6, pupils should be taught to use the following practical scientific 
methods, processes and skills through the teaching of the programme of study content: 
 planning different types of scientific enquiries to answer questions, including 
recognising and controlling variables where necessary 
 taking measurements, using a range of scientific equipment, with increasing 
accuracy and precision, taking repeat readings when appropriate 
 recording data and results of increasing complexity using scientific diagrams and 
labels, classification keys, tables, scatter graphs, bar and line graphs 
 using test results to make predictions to set up further comparative and fair tests 
 reporting and presenting findings from enquiries, including conclusions, causal 
relationships and explanations of and degree of trust in results, in oral and written 
forms such as displays and other presentations 
 identifying scientific evidence that has been used to support or refute ideas or 
arguments. 
 
Notes and guidance (non-statutory) 
Pupils in years 5 and 6 should use their science experiences to: explore ideas and raise 
different kinds of questions; select and plan the most appropriate type of scientific 
enquiry to use to answer scientific questions; recognise when and how to set up 
comparative and fair tests and explain which variables need to be controlled and why. 
They should use and develop keys and other information records to identify, classify and 
describe living things and materials, and identify patterns that might be found in the 
natural environment. They should make their own decisions about what observations to 
make, what measurements to use and how long to make them for, and whether to 
repeat them; choose the most appropriate equipment to make measurements and 
explain how to use it accurately. They should decide how to record data from a choice of 
familiar approaches; look for different causal relationships in their data and identify 
evidence that refutes or supports their ideas. They should use their results to identify 
when further tests and observations might be needed; recognise which secondary 
sources will be most useful to research their ideas and begin to separate opinion from 
fact. They should use relevant scientific language and illustrations to discuss, 
communicate and justify their scientific ideas and should talk about how scientific ideas 
have developed over time. 
Science – key stages 1 and 2 
Notes and guidance (non-statutory) 
These opportunities for working scientifically should be provided across years 5 and 6 so 
that the expectations in the programme of study can be met by the end of year 6. Pupils 
are not expected to cover each aspect for every area of study. 
26 
Science – key stages 1 and 2 
27 
Year 5 programme of study 
 
Living things and their habitats 
 
Statutory requirements 
Pupils should be taught to: 
 describe the differences in the life cycles of a mammal, an amphibian, an insect and 
a bird 
 describe the life process of reproduction in some plants and animals. 
 
Notes and guidance (non-statutory) 
Pupils should study and raise questions about their local environment throughout the 
year. They should observe life-cycle changes in a variety of living things, for example, 
plants in the vegetable garden or flower border, and animals in the local environment. 
They should find out about the work of naturalists and animal behaviourists, for example, 
David Attenborough and Jane Goodall. 
Pupils should find out about different types of reproduction, including sexual and asexual 
reproduction in plants, and sexual reproduction in animals. 
Pupils might work scientifically by: observing and comparing the life cycles of plants and 
animals in their local environment with other plants and animals around the world (in the 
rainforest, in the oceans, in desert areas and in prehistoric times), asking pertinent 
questions and suggesting reasons for similarities and differences.  They might try to 
grow new plants from different parts of the parent plant, for example, seeds, stem and 
root cuttings, tubers, bulbs. They might observe changes in an animal over a period of 
time (for example, by hatching and rearing chicks), comparing how different animals 
reproduce and grow. 
 
Animals, including humans 
 
Statutory requirements 
Pupils should be taught to: 
 describe the changes as humans develop to old age. 
 
Science – key stages 1 and 2 
28 
Notes and guidance (non-statutory) 
Pupils should draw a timeline to indicate stages in the growth and development of 
humans. They should learn about the changes experienced in puberty. 
Pupils could work scientifically by researching the gestation periods of other animals and 
comparing them with humans; by finding out and recording the length and mass of a 
baby as it grows. 
 
Properties and changes of materials 
 
Statutory requirements 
Pupils should be taught to: 
 compare and group together everyday materials on the basis of their properties, 
including their hardness, solubility, transparency, conductivity (electrical and 
thermal), and response to magnets 
 know that some materials will dissolve in liquid to form a solution, and describe how 
to recover a substance from a solution 
 use knowledge of solids, liquids and gases to decide how mixtures might be 
separated, including through filtering, sieving and evaporating 
 give reasons, based on evidence from comparative and fair tests, for the particular 
uses of everyday materials, including metals, wood and plastic 
 demonstrate that dissolving, mixing and changes of state are reversible changes 
 explain that some changes result in the formation of new materials, and that this kind 
of change is not usually reversible, including changes associated with burning and 
the action of acid on bicarbonate of soda. 
 
Notes and guidance (non-statutory) 
Pupils should build a more systematic understanding of materials by exploring and 
comparing the properties of a broad range of materials, including relating these to what 
they learnt about magnetism in year 3 and about electricity in year 4. They should 
explore reversible changes, including, evaporating, filtering, sieving, melting and 
dissolving, recognising that melting and dissolving are different processes. Pupils should 
explore changes that are difficult to reverse, for example, burning, rusting and other 
reactions, for example, vinegar with bicarbonate of soda. They should find out about 
how chemists create new materials, for example, Spencer Silver, who invented the glue 
for sticky notes or Ruth Benerito, who invented wrinkle-free cotton. 
Science – key stages 1 and 2 
29 
Notes and guidance (non-statutory) 
Note: Pupils are not required to make quantitative measurements about conductivity 
and insulation at this stage. It is sufficient for them to observe that some conductors will 
produce a brighter bulb in a circuit than others and that some materials will feel hotter 
than others when a heat source is placed against them. Safety guidelines should be 
followed when burning materials. 
Pupils might work scientifically by: carrying out tests to answer questions, for example, 
‘Which materials would be the most effective for making a warm jacket, for wrapping ice 
cream to stop it melting, or for making blackout curtains?’ They might compare materials 
in order to make a switch in a circuit. They could observe and compare the changes that 
take place, for example, when burning different materials or baking bread or cakes. They 
might research and discuss how chemical changes have an impact on our lives, for 
example, cooking, and discuss the creative use of new materials such as polymers, 
super-sticky and super-thin materials. 
 
Earth and space 
 
Statutory requirements 
Pupils should be taught to: 
 describe the movement of the Earth, and other planets, relative to the Sun in the 
solar system 
 describe the movement of the Moon relative to the Earth 
 describe the Sun, Earth and Moon as approximately spherical bodies 
 use the idea of the Earth’s rotation to explain day and night and the apparent 
movement of the sun across the sky. 
 
Notes and guidance (non-statutory) 
Pupils should be introduced to a model of the Sun and Earth that enables them to 
explain day and night. Pupils should learn that the Sun is a star at the centre of our solar 
system and that it has eight planets: Mercury, Venus, Earth, Mars, Jupiter, Saturn, 
Uranus and Neptune (Pluto was reclassified as a ‘dwarf planet’ in 2006). They should 
understand that a moon is a celestial body that orbits a planet (Earth has one moon; 
Jupiter has four large moons and numerous smaller ones). 
Note: Pupils should be warned that it is not safe to look directly at the Sun, even when 
wearing dark glasses. 
Science – key stages 1 and 2 
30 
Notes and guidance (non-statutory) 
Pupils should find out about the way that ideas about the solar system have developed, 
understanding how the geocentric model of the solar system gave way to the 
heliocentric model by considering the work of scientists such as Ptolemy, Alhazen and 
Copernicus. 
Pupils might work scientifically by: comparing the time of day at different places on the 
Earth through internet links and direct communication; creating simple models of the 
solar system; constructing simple shadow clocks and sundials, calibrated to show 
midday and the start and end of the school day; finding out why some people think that 
structures such as Stonehenge might have been used as astronomical clocks. 
 
Forces 
 
Statutory requirements 
Pupils should be taught to: 
 explain that unsupported objects fall towards the Earth because of the force of 
gravity acting between the Earth and the falling object 
 identify the effects of air resistance, water resistance and friction, that act between 
moving surfaces 
 recognise that some mechanisms, including levers, pulleys and gears, allow a 
smaller force to have a greater effect. 
 
Notes and guidance (non-statutory) 
Pupils should explore falling objects and raise questions about the effects of air 
resistance. They should explore the effects of air resistance by observing how different 
objects such as parachutes and sycamore seeds fall. They should experience forces 
that make things begin to move, get faster or slow down. Pupils should explore the 
effects of friction on movement and find out how it slows or stops moving objects, for 
example, by observing the effects of a brake on a bicycle wheel. Pupils should explore 
the effects of levers, pulleys and simple machines on movement. Pupils might find out 
how scientists, for example, Galileo Galilei and Isaac Newton helped to develop the 
theory of gravitation. 
Pupils might work scientifically by: exploring falling paper cones or cup-cake cases, and 
designing and making a variety of parachutes and carrying out fair tests to determine 
which designs are the most effective. They might explore resistance in water by making 
and testing boats of different shapes. They might design and make products that use 
levers, pulleys, gears and/or springs and explore their effects. 
 
Science – key stages 1 and 2 
31 
Year 6 programme of study 
 
Living things and their habitats 
 
Statutory requirements 
Pupils should be taught to: 
 describe how living things are classified into broad groups according to common 
observable characteristics and based on similarities and differences, including micro
organisms, plants and animals 
 give reasons for classifying plants and animals based on specific characteristics. 
 
Notes and guidance (non-statutory) 
Pupils should build on their learning about grouping living things in year 4 by looking at 
the classification system in more detail. They should be introduced to the idea that broad 
groupings, such as micro-organisms, plants and animals can be subdivided. Through 
direct observations where possible, they should classify animals into commonly found 
invertebrates (such as insects, spiders, snails, worms) and vertebrates (fish, 
amphibians, reptiles, birds and mammals). They should discuss reasons why living 
things are placed in one group and not another. 
Pupils might find out about the significance of the work of scientists such as Carl 
Linnaeus, a pioneer of classification. 
Pupils might work scientifically by: using classification systems and keys to identify some 
animals and plants in the immediate environment. They could research unfamiliar 
animals and plants from a broad range of other habitats and decide where they belong 
in the classification system. 
 
Animals including humans 
 
Statutory 
 
requirements 
Pupils should be taught to: 
 identify and name the main parts of the human circulatory system, and describe the 
functions of the heart, blood vessels and blood 
 recognise the impact of diet, exercise, drugs and lifestyle on the way their bodies 
function 
 describe the ways in which nutrients and water are transported within animals, 
including humans. 
Science – key stages 1 and 2 
Notes and guidance (non-statutory) 
Pupils should build on their learning from years 3 and 4 about the main body parts and 
internal organs (skeletal, muscular and digestive system) to explore and answer 
questions that help them to understand how the circulatory system enables the body to 
function. 
Pupils might work scientifically by: exploring the work of scientists and scientific research 
about the relationship between diet, exercise, drugs, lifestyle and health. 
Pupils should learn how to keep their bodies healthy and how their bodies might be 
damaged – including how some drugs and other substances can be harmful to the 
human body. 
Evolution and inheritance 
Statutory requirements 
Pupils should be taught to: 
 recognise that living things have changed over time and that fossils provide 
information about living things that inhabited the Earth millions of years ago 
 recognise that living things produce offspring of the same kind, but normally offspring 
vary and are not identical to their parents 
 identify how animals and plants are adapted to suit their environment in different 
ways and that adaptation may lead to evolution. 
Notes and guidance (non-statutory) 
Building on what they learned about fossils in the topic on rocks in year 3, pupils should 
find out more about how living things on earth have changed over time. They should be 
introduced to the idea that characteristics are passed from parents to their offspring, for 
instance by considering different breeds of dogs, and what happens when, for example, 
labradors are crossed with poodles. They should also appreciate that variation in 
offspring over time can make animals more or less able to survive in particular 
environments, for example, by exploring how giraffes’ necks got longer, or the 
development of insulating fur on the arctic fox. Pupils might find out about the work of 
palaeontologists such as Mary Anning and about how Charles Darwin and Alfred 
Wallace developed their ideas on evolution. 
Note: At this stage, pupils are not expected to understand how genes and 
chromosomes work. 
32 
Science – key stages 1 and 2 
33 
Notes and guidance (non-statutory) 
Pupils might work scientifically by: observing and raising questions about local animals 
and how they are adapted to their environment; comparing how some living things are 
adapted to survive in extreme conditions, for example, cactuses, penguins and camels. 
They might analyse the advantages and disadvantages of specific adaptations, such as 
being on two feet rather than four, having a long or a short beak, having gills or lungs, 
tendrils on climbing plants, brightly coloured and scented flowers. 
 
Light 
 
Statutory requirements 
Pupils should be taught to: 
 recognise that light appears to travel in straight lines 
 use the idea that light travels in straight lines to explain that objects are seen 
because they give out or reflect light into the eye 
 explain that we see things because light travels from light sources to our eyes or 
from light sources to objects and then to our eyes 
 use the idea that light travels in straight lines to explain why shadows have the same 
shape as the objects that cast them. 
 
Notes and guidance (non-statutory) 
Pupils should build on the work on light in year 3, exploring the way that light behaves, 
including light sources, reflection and shadows. They should talk about what happens 
and make predictions. 
Pupils might work scientifically by: deciding where to place rear-view mirrors on cars; 
designing and making a periscope and using the idea that light appears to travel in 
straight lines to explain how it works. They might investigate the relationship between 
light sources, objects and shadows by using shadow puppets. They could extend their 
experience of light by looking a range of phenomena including rainbows, colours on 
soap bubbles, objects looking bent in water and coloured filters (they do not need to 
explain why these phenomena occur). 
 
Science – key stages 1 and 2 
34 
Electricity 
 
Statutory requirements 
Pupils should be taught to: 
 associate the brightness of a lamp or the volume of a buzzer with the number and 
voltage of cells used in the circuit 
 compare and give reasons for variations in how components function, including the 
brightness of bulbs, the loudness of buzzers and the on/off position of switches 
 use recognised symbols when representing a simple circuit in a diagram. 
 
Notes and guidance (non-statutory) 
Building on their work in year 4, pupils should construct simple series circuits, to help 
them to answer questions about what happens when they try different components, for 
example, switches, bulbs, buzzers and motors. They should learn how to represent a 
simple circuit in a diagram using recognised symbols. 
Note: Pupils are expected to learn only about series circuits, not parallel circuits. Pupils 
should be taught to take the necessary precautions for working safely with electricity. 
Pupils might work scientifically by: systematically identifying the effect of changing one 
component at a time in a circuit; designing and making a set of traffic lights, a burglar 
alarm or some other useful circuit. 
 
© Crown copyright 2013 
You may re-use this information (excluding logos) free of charge in any format or medium, under 
the terms of the Open Government Licence. To view this licence, visit 
http://www.nationalarchives.gov.uk/doc/open-government-licence/ or email: 
psi@nationalarchives.gsi.gov.uk. 
Reference: DFE-00182-2013 